Design pattern creational abstract factory (#445)
Codecademy/docs: content/general/concepts/abstract-factory/abstract-factory.md

---
Title: 'Abstract Factory Pattern'

> Description: 'The abstract factory is often thought of a factory of factory patterns. Much like the factory pattern, the abstract factory relies on a common interface and defers instantiation logic to its concrete model classes.'

Reviewer: For entry metadata, we ideally want the `Description` to have the following things: 

- Is 150 characters or less.
- Begins with a verb in the present-tense. (i.e. "Runs", "Describes", "Works as", etc.)
- (optional) Closely resembles the first 1-2 sentences of the entry's opening paragraph.

Meeting these two (or three) criteria improves the entry page's SEO.

Subjects:
  - 'Computer Science'
  - 'Interview Prep'
Tags:
  - 'Classes'
  - 'Conceptual'
  - 'Constructors'
  - 'Objects'
CatalogContent:
  - 'learn-java'
  - 'paths/computer-science'
---

The abstract factory is often thought of a factory of factory patterns. Much like the factory pattern, the abstract factory relies on a common interface and defers instantiation logic to its concrete model classes. Unlike the factory pattern, the abstract factory is typically built using composition where the factory is not.

## UML Design

![UML diagram of an abstract factory](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/Codecademy/docs/main/media/abstract-factory-uml.png)

## Java Example

> To illustrate the abstract factory pattern, below provides a real-world example, in Java, depicting potential considerations for a banking account system. A potential customer will request either a current or savings account. The customer may also be entitled to different privileges depending on their credit score. Blow is a table of accounts and their privileges:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To illustrate the abstract factory pattern, below is a real-world example, written in Java, that explores potential considerations for a banking account system. A new customer will request either a current or savings account. The customer may also be entitled to different privileges depending on their credit score. Below is a table of accounts and their privileges:
```

| Customer Type | Current                     | Saving                |
| ------------- | --------------------------- | --------------------- |
| Gold          | Max overdraft limit of 3500 | Interest rate of 5%   |
| Silver        | Max overdraft limit of 1200 | Interest rate of 3%   |
| Bronze        | Max overdraft limit of 500  | Interest rate of 1.5% |
| Builder       | No overdraft                | Interest rate of 1.5% |

To simulate requesting and receiving a customer's credit score, a gateway has been mocked below. When given a customers name, the`CreditAgencyGateway` class should return an appropriate `Customer` object. We can later use this class to see the different paths through our abstract factory.

```java
public class CreditAgencyGateway {
  // Depending on which name is searched for, a different customer object is returned
  public Customer getCustomer(String name) {
    return switch (name) {

>       case "Harry" -> new Customer("Harry",

Reviewer: Could we cut this switch statement down from 6 cases to 3 cases?

      case "Hermione" -> new Customer("Hermione",
                                      "Granger",
                                      LocalDate.of(1979, 9, 19),
                                      "12 Grimmauld Palace, London",
                                      843);
      case "Lucius" -> new Customer("Lucius",
                                    "Malfoy",
                                    LocalDate.of(1954, 2, 4),
                                    "Malfoy Mannor, Wiltshire",
                                    978);
      case "Dobby" -> new Customer("Dobby",
                                   "the house elf",
                                   LocalDate.of(1972, 6, 28),
                                   "Malfoy Mannor, Wiltshire",
                                   256);
      case "Sirius" -> new Customer("Sirius",
                                    "Black",
                                    LocalDate.of(1959, 11, 3),
                                    "12, Grimmauld Place, London",
                                    169);
      default -> throw new IllegalArgumentException("Could not return the credit history for " + name);
    };
  }
}
```

> The `CreditAgencyGateway` uses a switch statement to query a provided `name`. If the name is recognised a new customer is returned, else an exception is thrown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `CreditAgencyGateway` class uses a `switch` statement to query a provided `name`. If the name is recognized a new customer is returned. Otherwise, an exception is thrown.
```

One of the main advantages to factory patterns, are they allow for a large amount of model classes and enforce a common interface between them. Below provides an abstract model `CurrentAccount` class for its concrete sub-classes to be based on:

```java
public abstract class CurrentAccount {
  private final String accountUID = UUID.randomUUID().toString();
  private final Customer accountHolder;
  private int balance;
  private int agreedOverdraftLimit;

  public CurrentAccount(Customer accountHolder, int initBalance, int agreedOverdraftLimit) {
    this.accountHolder = accountHolder;
    this.balance = initBalance;
    this.agreedOverdraftLimit = agreedOverdraftLimit;
  }

  public void addFunds(final int amount) {
    balance += amount;
  }

  public void withdrawFunds(final int amount) {
    if (amount < balance + agreedOverdraftLimit) {
      balance -= amount;
    } else {
      System.out.println("Insufficient funds. Unable to withdraw " + amount);
    }
  }
  // Enforces concrete classes to override this method
  public abstract void increaseOverdraft(int requestedLimit);

>   // Getters

Reviewer: Was there supposed to be more code here? Like getters and setters?

Author: The comment "// Getters" is placed there to let people know what additional boiler plate code is needed in order to make this work. The issue with writing in the getters, setters, toString etc is it massively increases the code e.g. without adding any new knowledge. This kind of repetitive non-business code is so common in java that a lot of industry developers use something called project Lombok (which will add code for should u annotate the class with @Getter). You can find out more (if your interested)  https://www.baeldung.com/intro-to-project-lombok

Author: Yes getters and setter might make sence here. Both ballance and agreedOverdraft are not final. These properties do however have acting setters programmed out. withdrawFunds() and addFunds() are essentially setters for balance, and increaseOverdraft is a setter for agreedOverdraft. 

Adding additional setters would cause a security concern as the method would be public (anything can access it) and someone could write...

CurrentAcount myAccount = new GoldPersonal(customer, int, int);
myAccount.setBalance(1_000_000);

That way they would get around the addFunds checks :)

}
```

> The parent class above, as well as providing the common fields and constructor, requires its children to implement the `increaseOverdraft` method. This is the differentiating feature described between each current account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The parent `CurrentAccount` class above, as well as providing the common fields and constructor, requires its children to implement the `.increaseOverdraft()` method. This is the differentiating feature described between each current account.
```

> Below provides the concrete implementations of `CurrentAccount` for this example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code snippets below are the concrete implementations of `CurrentAccount`. The first is the Gold-level:
```

```java
public class GoldPersonal extends CurrentAccount {
  // The Gold Personal has a high max overdraft limit
  public static final int MAX_OVERDRAFT = 3500;

  public GoldPersonal(Customer accountHolder, int initBalance, int agreedOverdraftLimit) {
    super(accountHolder, initBalance, agreedOverdraftLimit);
  }
  // Concrete overridden method
  @Override
  public void increaseOverdraft(int requestedLimit) {
    if (requestedLimit < MAX_OVERDRAFT) {
      this.setAgreedOverdraftLimit(requestedLimit);
    }
  }
}
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Next is the Silver-level implementation of the `CurrentAccount`:

```

```java
public class SilverPersonal extends CurrentAccount {
  // The Silver Personal has a mid max overdraft limit
  public static final int MAX_OVERDRAFT = 1200;

  public SilverPersonal(Customer accountHolder, int initBalance, int agreedOverdraftLimit) {
    super(accountHolder, initBalance, agreedOverdraftLimit);
  }
  // Concrete overridden method
  @Override
  public void increaseOverdraft(int requestedLimit) {
    if (requestedLimit < MAX_OVERDRAFT) {
      this.setAgreedOverdraftLimit(requestedLimit);
    }
  }
}
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

Lastly, here is the Bronze-level implementation:

```

```java
public class BronzePersonal extends CurrentAccount {
  // The Bronze Personal has a low max overdraft limit
  public static final int MAX_OVERDRAFT = 500;

  public BronzePersonal(Customer accountHolder, int initBalance, int agreedOverdraftLimit) {
    super(accountHolder, initBalance, agreedOverdraftLimit);
  }
  // Concrete overridden method
  @Override
  public void increaseOverdraft(int requestedLimit) {
    if (requestedLimit < MAX_OVERDRAFT) {
      this.setAgreedOverdraftLimit(requestedLimit);
    }
  }
}
```

```java
public class CreditBuilder extends CurrentAccount {
  // The Credit Builder does not allow for an overdraft
  public static final int MAX_OVERDRAFT = 0;

  public CreditBuilder(Customer accountHolder, int initBalance, int agreedOverdraftLimit) {
    super(accountHolder, initBalance, agreedOverdraftLimit);

>   }
>   // Concrete overridden method

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  }
  
  // Concrete overridden method
```

  @Override
  public void increaseOverdraft(int requestedLimit) {
    if (requestedLimit < MAX_OVERDRAFT) {
      this.setAgreedOverdraftLimit(requestedLimit);
    }
  }
}
```

> In each concrete current account, a `static` variable (`MAX_OVERDRAFT`) hase been provided and constructed with the correct value. This is then used in the `increaseOverdraft` method to ensure this limit is not exceeded.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In each concrete current account, a `static` variable (`MAX_OVERDRAFT`) has been provided and constructed with the correct value. This is then used in the `.increaseOverdraft()` method to ensure this limit is not exceeded.
```

> Below provides an abstract model `SavingsAccount` class for its concrete sub-classes to be based on:

Reviewer: Here, you wrote `SavingsAccount`, but most, if not all, of the mentions after this are `SavingAccount`. 

Should we change this to `SavingAccount` or the other way around?

```java
public abstract class SavingAccount {
  private final String accountUID = UUID.randomUUID().toString();
  private final Customer accountHolder;
  private final LocalDate dateOpened;
  private double balance;

  public SavingAccount(Customer accountHolder, LocalDate dateOpened, double initBalance) {
    this.accountHolder = accountHolder;
    this.dateOpened = dateOpened;
    this.balance = initBalance;
  }

  public void addFunds(final int amount) {
    balance += amount;
  }

  public void withdrawFunds(final int amount) {
    balance -= amount;
  }
  // Enforces concrete classes to override this method
  public abstract void addInterest();

  // Getters and setter
}
```

> Much like `CurrentAccount`, `SavingAccount` provides the common fields and constructor and requires its children to implement the `addInterest` method. This is the differentiating feature described between each savings account.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Much like `CurrentAccount`, `SavingAccount` provides the common fields and constructor and requires its children to implement the `.addInterest()` method. This is the differentiating feature described between each savings account.
```

> Below provides the concrete implementations of `SavingAccount` for this example:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Below is the concrete implementation of a Gold-level `SavingAccount`:
```

```java
public class GoldSaver extends SavingAccount {
  // The Gold Saver has a high interest rate
  public static final double INTEREST_RATE_MULTIPLIER = 1.05;

  public GoldSaver(Customer accountHolder, LocalDate dateOpened, double initBalance) {
    super(accountHolder, dateOpened, initBalance);
  }
  // Concrete overridden method
  @Override
  public void addInterest() {
    if (LocalDate.now().getMonth() == this.getDateOpened().getMonth()
            && LocalDate.now().getDayOfMonth() == this.getDateOpened().getDayOfMonth()) {
      this.setBalance(this.getBalance() * INTEREST_RATE_MULTIPLIER);
    }
  }
}
```

> 

Reviewer: Having no text between code blocks is discouraged. Could we add in a sentence that leads in to the next code block? Something like: "This is an implementation of the Silver-level `SavingAccount`:"

```java
public class SilverSaver extends SavingAccount {

>   // The Silver Saver has an mid interest rate

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  // The Silver Saver has a mid interest rate
```

  public static final double INTEREST_RATE_MULTIPLIER = 1.03;

  public SilverSaver(Customer accountHolder, LocalDate dateOpened, double initBalance) {
    super(accountHolder, dateOpened, initBalance);

>   }
>   // Concrete overridden method

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  }
  
  
  // Concrete overridden method
```
```suggestion
  }
  // Concrete overridden method
```

Reviewer: I'd keep an empty line between a closing curly bracket and the next thing (comment, variable statement, etc.) just to keep the code spaced and readable.

  @Override
  public void addInterest() {
    if (LocalDate.now().getMonth() == this.getDateOpened().getMonth()
            && LocalDate.now().getDayOfMonth() == this.getDateOpened().getDayOfMonth()) {
      this.setBalance(this.getBalance() * INTEREST_RATE_MULTIPLIER);
    }
  }
}
```

```java
public class BronzeSaver extends SavingAccount {
  // The Bronze Saver has a low interest rate
  public static final double INTEREST_RATE_MULTIPLIER = 1.015;

  public BronzeSaver(Customer accountHolder, LocalDate dateOpened, int initBalance) {
        super(accountHolder, dateOpened, initBalance);

>   }
>   // Concrete overridden method

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  }
  
  // Concrete overridden method
```
```suggestion
  }
  // Concrete overridden method
```

  @Override
  public void addInterest() {
    if (LocalDate.now().getMonth() == this.getDateOpened().getMonth()
            && LocalDate.now().getDayOfMonth() == this.getDateOpened().getDayOfMonth()) {
      this.setBalance(this.getBalance() * INTEREST_RATE_MULTIPLIER);
    }
  }
}
```

> In each concrete savings account, a `static` variable (`INTEREST_RATE_MULTIPLIER`) has been provided and constructed with the correct value. This is then used to calculate interest in the `addInterest` method.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In each concrete savings account, a `static` variable, the `INTEREST_RATE_MULTIPLIER`, has been provided and constructed with the correct value. It is then used to calculate interest in the `.addInterest()` method.
```

Methods should use the `.methodName()` format in Docs entries.

> The purpose of the `AccountFactory` is to return one of its concrete factories. Below provides the example of the abstract factory `AccountFactory`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The purpose of the abstract `AccountFactory` is to return one of its concrete factories. Below is an example of what the code would look like:
```

Per the code below, does the `<T>` mean in `AccountFactory<T>`?

Author: The <T> refers to something called Generics in java. Unlike languages like js and python, Java is strongly typed. This means that properties and variables have a type (either complex or simple) assigned. For e.g.

public **String** someString = "someString"; <- this property cant be anything other than a string.

The issue with that is when inheritance starts coming in, we sometimes don't know what type is needed until we are in a class that is lower down. Being able to pass children an unknown type, then in the child defining that type becomes really useful. You can see more here https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h7piyWnQbZA 

The only other thing worth saying is what does <?> mean. It is literally shorthand for extends object, but the way java works is every type ultimately extends object. So the programmer is kind of saying 'I'm too lazy to work out what should go in here'. Its a little hacky.

Reviewer: Nice! I just checked the Docs site, in the Java section, and we don't seem to have an entry for generic types. I'll make an issue for that one! No need to explain it here, though.

```java
public abstract class AccountFactory<T> {
  // Returns different concrete factory depending on AccountType
  public static AccountFactory<?> getAccountFactory(AccountType accountType) {
    return switch (accountType) {
        case SAVINGS -> new SavingAccountFactory();
        case CURRENT -> new CurrentAccountFactory();
        default -> throw new IllegalArgumentException("Unknown account type: " + accountType);
      };

>   }
>   // Enforces concrete factories to override this method
>   public abstract T getAccount(Customer customer);
>   // Returns CustomerType depending on creditScore property. Put in the abstract to reduce duplicate code
>   protected CustomerType getCustomerType(Customer customer) {

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  }
  
  // Enforces concrete factories to override this method
  public abstract T getAccount(Customer customer);
  
   // Returns CustomerType depending on creditScore property. Put in the abstract to reduce duplicate code
  protected CustomerType getCustomerType(Customer customer) {
```

    if (customer.getCreditScore() > 700) {
      return CustomerType.GOLD;
    } else if (customer.getCreditScore() > 400) {
      return CustomerType.SILVER;
    } else if (customer.getCreditScore() > 200) {
      return CustomerType.BRONZE;
    } else {
      return CustomerType.BUILDER;
    }
  }
}
```

> The `AccountFactory` enforces its concrete sub-classes to implement its abstract method `getAccount`. It also includes an implemented method `getCustomerType` to reduce duplication. The logic for returning a `CustomerType` is the same in both `CurrentAccountFactory` and `SavingAccountFactory`. We might expect this logic to be in the concrete classes below as they use this logic, but in this example it doesn't matter.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `AccountFactory` enforces its concrete sub-classes to implement its abstract `.getAccount()` method. A `.getCustomerType()` is included to reduce duplication. The same logic for returning a `CustomerType` is used in `CurrentAccountFactory` and `SavingAccountFactory`. We might expect this logic to be in the concrete classes below as they use this logic, but in this example it doesn't matter.
```

> Finally, the `getAccountFactory` method uses a switch statement to return a concrete factory depending on an `AccountType`. The `AccountType` enum is provided below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Finally, the `.getAccountFactory()` method uses a `switch` statement to return a concrete factory depending on an `AccountType`, with the `enum` provided below:
```

```java
public enum AccountType {
  SAVINGS,
  CURRENT
}
```

> The concrete factories `CurrentAccountfactory` and `SavingAccountFactory` are responsible for returning the correct concrete model class when called. See the implementation below:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following factories, `CurrentAccountFactory` and `SavingAccountFactory`, are responsible for returning the correct concrete model class when called:
```

```java
public class CreditAgencyGateway {
  // Depending on which name is searched for, a different customer object is returned
  public Customer getCustomer(String name) {
    return switch (name) {
      case "Harry" -> new Customer("Harry",
                                   "Potter",
                                   LocalDate.of(1980, 7, 31),
                                   "4 Privet Drive, Little Whinging",
                                   795);
      case "Ron" -> new Customer("Ron",
                                 "Weasley",
                                 LocalDate.of(1980, 3, 1),
                                 "The Burrow, Devon",
                                 379);
      case "Hermione" -> new Customer("Hermione",
                                      "Granger",
                                      LocalDate.of(1979, 9, 19),
                                      "Hampstead Garden Suburb, London",
                                      843);
      default -> throw new IllegalArgumentException("Could not return the credit history for " + name);
    };
  }
}
```

> The `CreditAgencyGateway` class uses a `switch` statement to query a provided `name`. If the name is recognized, a new customer is returned. Otherwise, an exception is thrown.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `CreditAgencyGateway` class uses a [`switch` statement](https://www.codecademy.com/resources/docs/java/switch) to query a provided `name`. If the name is recognized, a new customer is returned. Otherwise, an exception is thrown.
```

Author: Great idea!!!!

Might be worth creating some more of these connections in docs as a kind of improvement story a little later on!!

One of the main advantages of factory patterns is they allow for a large amount of model classes and enforce a common interface between them. In the code below, an abstract model `CurrentAccount` class works as an extension for its concrete sub-classes to be based on:

```java
public abstract class CurrentAccount {
  private final String accountUID = UUID.randomUUID().toString();
  private final Customer accountHolder;
  private int balance;
  private int agreedOverdraftLimit;

  public CurrentAccount(Customer accountHolder, int initBalance, int agreedOverdraftLimit) {
    this.accountHolder = accountHolder;
    this.balance = initBalance;
    this.agreedOverdraftLimit = agreedOverdraftLimit;
  }

  public void addFunds(final int amount) {
    balance += amount;
  }

  public void withdrawFunds(final int amount) {
    if (amount < balance + agreedOverdraftLimit) {
      balance -= amount;
    } else {
      System.out.println("Insufficient funds. Unable to withdraw " + amount);
    }
  }

  // Enforces concrete classes to override this method
  public abstract void increaseOverdraft(int requestedLimit);

  // Getters
}
```

> **Note:** Getters have been excluded from the above code snippet.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For brevity, the getters have been excluded from the code snippet above.
```

Author: Hay @Dusch4593 - I seem to be getting some contradictory advice at the min. I think @yangc95 wanted these notes about getters to be removed as it will make it the same to other entries. I'm super happy to go either way, but would want consistency within the entry. Please see the comment on line 214.

Please advise?

Author: Ive removed to bring inline. Happy to re open should you feel its needed :)

      case SILVER -> new SilverSaver(customer, LocalDate.now(), 0);
      case BRONZE, BUILDER -> new BronzeSaver(customer, LocalDate.now(), 0);
      default -> throw new IllegalArgumentException("Unable to create account.");
    };
  }
}
```

An implementation has been provided for the `.getAccount()` method. The `CustomerType` is worked out using its parent's `getCustomerType` method and captured before being used in a `switch` statement that returns the appropriate objects.

The `Main` class below, starts the program and acts as the client in this example. It begins by getting a customer from the `CreditAgencyGateway` and gets an appropriate factory by using the `.getAccountFactory()` method. Changing the name in the `.getCustomer()` method or changing the `AccountType` in the `.getAccountFactory()` method will yield different results. A specific `CurrentAccount` or `SavingAccount` can then be returned by the `getAccount` method.

```java
public class Main {
  public static void main(String[] args) {
    final CreditAgencyGateway creditAgencyGateway = new CreditAgencyGateway();

    // Get customer. Change name to change outputted account types.

>     final Customer customer = creditAgencyGateway.getCustomer("Sirius");

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    final Customer customer = creditAgencyGateway.getCustomer("Hermione");
```

I believe `"Sirius"` was removed in the last batch of changes.

---
Title: 'Abstract Factory Pattern'
Description: 'The abstract factory is often thought of a factory of factory patterns. Much like the factory pattern, the abstract factory relies on a common interface and defers instantiation logic to its concrete model classes.'
Subjects:
  - 'Computer Science'
  - 'Interview Prep'
Tags:
  - 'Classes'
  - 'Conceptual'
  - 'Constructors'
  - 'Objects'
CatalogContent:
  - 'learn-java'
  - 'paths/computer-science'
---

> The abstract factory is often thought of a factory of factory patterns. Much like the factory pattern, the abstract factory relies on a common interface and defers instantiation logic to its concrete model classes. Unlike the factory pattern, the abstract factory is typically built using composition where the factory is not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The abstract factory is often thought of as a factory of factory patterns. Similar to the factory pattern, the abstract factory relies on a common interface and defers instantiation logic to its concrete model classes. However, it covers multiple factories. Additionally, unlike the factory pattern, the abstract factory is typically built using composition whereas the factory is not.
```

                                      "12 Grimmauld Palace, London",
                                      843);
      case "Lucius" -> new Customer("Lucius",
                                    "Malfoy",
                                    LocalDate.of(1954, 2, 4),
                                    "Malfoy Mannor, Wiltshire",
                                    978);
      case "Dobby" -> new Customer("Dobby",
                                   "the house elf",
                                   LocalDate.of(1972, 6, 28),
                                   "Malfoy Mannor, Wiltshire",
                                   256);
      case "Sirius" -> new Customer("Sirius",
                                    "Black",
                                    LocalDate.of(1959, 11, 3),
                                    "12, Grimmauld Place, London",
                                    169);
      default -> throw new IllegalArgumentException("Could not return the credit history for " + name);
    };
  }
}
```

The `CreditAgencyGateway` class uses a `switch` statement to query a provided `name`. If the name is recognized a new customer is returned. Otherwise, an exception is thrown.

> One of the main advantages to factory patterns, are they allow for a large amount of model classes and enforce a common interface between them. Below provides an abstract model `CurrentAccount` class for its concrete sub-classes to be based on:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the main advantages of factory patterns is they allow for a large amount of model classes and enforce a common interface between them. In the code below, an abstract model `CurrentAccount` class works as an extension for its concrete sub-classes to be based on:
```

```java
public abstract class CurrentAccount {
  private final String accountUID = UUID.randomUUID().toString();
  private final Customer accountHolder;
  private int balance;
  private int agreedOverdraftLimit;

  public CurrentAccount(Customer accountHolder, int initBalance, int agreedOverdraftLimit) {
    this.accountHolder = accountHolder;
    this.balance = initBalance;
    this.agreedOverdraftLimit = agreedOverdraftLimit;
  }

  public void addFunds(final int amount) {
    balance += amount;
  }

  public void withdrawFunds(final int amount) {
    if (amount < balance + agreedOverdraftLimit) {
      balance -= amount;
    } else {
      System.out.println("Insufficient funds. Unable to withdraw " + amount);
    }

>   }
>   // Enforces concrete classes to override this method

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  }
  
  // Enforces concrete classes to override this method
```

  public abstract void increaseOverdraft(int requestedLimit);

  // Getters
}
```

The parent `CurrentAccount` class above, as well as providing the common fields and constructor, requires its children to implement the `.increaseOverdraft()` method. This is the differentiating feature described between each current account.

The code snippets below are the concrete implementations of `CurrentAccount`. The first is the Gold-level:

```java
public class GoldPersonal extends CurrentAccount {
  // The Gold Personal has a high max overdraft limit
  public static final int MAX_OVERDRAFT = 3500;

  public GoldPersonal(Customer accountHolder, int initBalance, int agreedOverdraftLimit) {
    super(accountHolder, initBalance, agreedOverdraftLimit);

>   }
>   // Concrete overridden method

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  }
  
  // Concrete overridden method
```

  @Override
  public void increaseOverdraft(int requestedLimit) {
    if (requestedLimit < MAX_OVERDRAFT) {
      this.setAgreedOverdraftLimit(requestedLimit);
    }
  }
}
```

Next is the Silver-level implementation of the `CurrentAccount`:

```java
public class SilverPersonal extends CurrentAccount {
  // The Silver Personal has a mid max overdraft limit
  public static final int MAX_OVERDRAFT = 1200;

  public SilverPersonal(Customer accountHolder, int initBalance, int agreedOverdraftLimit) {
    super(accountHolder, initBalance, agreedOverdraftLimit);

>   }
>   // Concrete overridden method

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  }
  
  // Concrete overridden method
```

  @Override
  public void increaseOverdraft(int requestedLimit) {
    if (requestedLimit < MAX_OVERDRAFT) {
      this.setAgreedOverdraftLimit(requestedLimit);
    }
  }
}
```

Lastly, here is the Bronze-level implementation:

```java
public class BronzePersonal extends CurrentAccount {
  // The Bronze Personal has a low max overdraft limit
  public static final int MAX_OVERDRAFT = 500;

  public BronzePersonal(Customer accountHolder, int initBalance, int agreedOverdraftLimit) {
    super(accountHolder, initBalance, agreedOverdraftLimit);

>   }
>   // Concrete overridden method

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  }
  
  // Concrete overridden method
```

    super(accountHolder, initBalance, agreedOverdraftLimit);
  }
  
  // Concrete overridden method
  @Override
  public void increaseOverdraft(int requestedLimit) {
    if (requestedLimit < MAX_OVERDRAFT) {
      this.setAgreedOverdraftLimit(requestedLimit);
    }
  }
}
```

In each concrete current account, a `static` variable (`MAX_OVERDRAFT`) has been provided and constructed with the correct value. This is then used in the `.increaseOverdraft()` method to ensure this limit is not exceeded.

Below provides an abstract model `SavingsAccount` class for its concrete sub-classes to be based on:

```java
public abstract class SavingAccount {
  private final String accountUID = UUID.randomUUID().toString();
  private final Customer accountHolder;
  private final LocalDate dateOpened;
  private double balance;

  public SavingAccount(Customer accountHolder, LocalDate dateOpened, double initBalance) {
    this.accountHolder = accountHolder;
    this.dateOpened = dateOpened;
    this.balance = initBalance;
  }

  public void addFunds(final int amount) {
    balance += amount;
  }

  public void withdrawFunds(final int amount) {
    balance -= amount;

>   }
>   // Enforces concrete classes to override this method

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  }
  
  // Enforces concrete classes to override this method
```

  public abstract void addInterest();

  // Getters and setter
}
```

Much like `CurrentAccount`, `SavingAccount` provides the common fields and constructor and requires its children to implement the `.addInterest()` method. This is the differentiating feature described between each savings account.

Below provides the concrete implementations of `SavingAccount` for this example:

```java
public class GoldSaver extends SavingAccount {
  // The Gold Saver has a high interest rate
  public static final double INTEREST_RATE_MULTIPLIER = 1.05;

  public GoldSaver(Customer accountHolder, LocalDate dateOpened, double initBalance) {
    super(accountHolder, dateOpened, initBalance);

>   }
>   // Concrete overridden method

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  }
  
  // Concrete overridden method
```

---
Title: 'Abstract Factory Pattern'
Description: 'The abstract factory pattern relies on a common interface for multiple factories and defers instantiation logic to their concrete model classes.'
Subjects:
  - 'Computer Science'
  - 'Interview Prep'
Tags:
  - 'Classes'
  - 'Conceptual'
  - 'Constructors'
  - 'Objects'
CatalogContent:
  - 'learn-java'
  - 'paths/computer-science'
---

> The abstract factory is often thought of as a factory of factory patterns. Similar to the factory pattern, the abstract factory relies on a common interface and defers instantiation logic to its concrete model classes. However, it covers multiple factories. Additionally, unlike the factory pattern, the abstract factory is typically built using composition whereas the factory is not.

Author: Yes. Being super honest, I didn't really understand this too much, and was hoping it would be missed during PR.

The idea is about composition vs inheritance. Inheritance, you get stuff from a parent class (either bits of functionality or useful fields) and composition (I think) you get what the object needs by having properties containing other useful objects. I.e. when then objects created / composed, it has stuff provided by the constructor??

I'm super unsure of this!! Will have to read more :)

> The abstract factory is often thought of as a factory of factory patterns. Similar to the factory pattern, the abstract factory relies on a common interface and defers instantiation logic to its concrete model classes. However, it covers multiple factories. Additionally, unlike the factory pattern, the abstract factory is typically built using composition whereas the factory is not.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The abstract factory pattern utilizes a common interface for multiple factories without defining their concrete model classes. It is often thought of as a factory of factory patterns where object composition is used to separate instantiation logic from application logic.
```

What about this?

| Gold          | Max overdraft limit of 3500 | Interest rate of 5%   |
| Silver        | Max overdraft limit of 1200 | Interest rate of 3%   |
| Bronze        | Max overdraft limit of 500  | Interest rate of 1.5% |
| Builder       | No overdraft                | Interest rate of 1.5% |

To simulate requesting and receiving a customer's credit score, a gateway has been mocked below. When given a customers name, the`CreditAgencyGateway` class should return an appropriate `Customer` object. We can later use this class to see the different paths through our abstract factory.

```java
public class CreditAgencyGateway {
  // Depending on which name is searched for, a different customer object is returned
  public Customer getCustomer(String name) {
    return switch (name) {
      case "Harry" -> new Customer("Harry",
                                   "Potter",
                                   LocalDate.of(1980, 7, 31),
                                   "4 Privet Drive, Little Whinging",
                                   795);
      case "Ron" -> new Customer("Ron",
                                 "Weasley",
                                 LocalDate.of(1980, 3, 1),

>                                  "Shell Cottage, Cornwall",

Author: Ye your right!!

                                 379);
      case "Hermione" -> new Customer("Hermione",
                                      "Granger",
                                      LocalDate.of(1979, 9, 19),

>                                       "12 Grimmauld Palace, London",

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
                                      "Hampstead Garden Suburb, London",
```

12 Grimmauld is the house of the Blacks, the family of Harry's godfather Sirius 👀 🤣

Reviewer 2: What a fun example ⚡

Author: Ye I think I must of del the wrong bit during one of the revisions. Sirius was one of the characters used in an old version of the gateway. He had a very bad credit rating due to his time in Azkaban 🤣

  private final Customer accountHolder;
  private int balance;
  private int agreedOverdraftLimit;

  public CurrentAccount(Customer accountHolder, int initBalance, int agreedOverdraftLimit) {
    this.accountHolder = accountHolder;
    this.balance = initBalance;
    this.agreedOverdraftLimit = agreedOverdraftLimit;
  }

  public void addFunds(final int amount) {
    balance += amount;
  }

  public void withdrawFunds(final int amount) {
    if (amount < balance + agreedOverdraftLimit) {
      balance -= amount;
    } else {
      System.out.println("Insufficient funds. Unable to withdraw " + amount);
    }
  }

  // Enforces concrete classes to override this method
  public abstract void increaseOverdraft(int requestedLimit);

  // Getters
}
```

**Note:** Getters have been excluded from the above code snippet.

The parent `CurrentAccount` class above, as well as providing the common fields and constructor, requires its children to implement the `.increaseOverdraft()` method. This is the differentiating feature described between each current account.

The code snippets below are the concrete implementations of `CurrentAccount`. The first is the Gold-level:

```java

> public class GoldPersonal extends CurrentAccount {

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
public class GoldPersonal extends CurrentAccount {
```

Did you mean GoldPersonnel or GoldPersonal?

Author: I beliew I am correct, and will resolve. Feel free to re open should you dis-agree

  }

  // Concrete overridden method
  @Override
  public void increaseOverdraft(int requestedLimit) {
    if (requestedLimit < MAX_OVERDRAFT) {
      this.setAgreedOverdraftLimit(requestedLimit);
    }
  }
}
```

In each concrete current account, a `static` variable (`MAX_OVERDRAFT`) has been provided and constructed with the correct value. This is then used in the `.increaseOverdraft()` method to ensure this limit is not exceeded.

Below provides an abstract model `SavingAccount` class for its concrete sub-classes to be based on:

```java
public abstract class SavingAccount {
  private final String accountUID = UUID.randomUUID().toString();
  private final Customer accountHolder;
  private final LocalDate dateOpened;
  private double balance;

  public SavingAccount(Customer accountHolder, LocalDate dateOpened, double initBalance) {
    this.accountHolder = accountHolder;
    this.dateOpened = dateOpened;
    this.balance = initBalance;
  }

  public void addFunds(final int amount) {
    balance += amount;
  }

  public void withdrawFunds(final int amount) {
    balance -= amount;
  }

  // Enforces concrete classes to override this method
  public abstract void addInterest();

>   // Getters

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  // Getters below
```

** I remember this is how it was done in the previous patterns. I think the way it was done before is good ☺️

}
```

> **Note:** Getters have been excluded from the above code snippet.

Reviewer 2: This can probably just be incorporated into the code since notes are meant for extra information a reader should take important notes of.
